Add guide to add pages to the sitemap (#110)
front-commerce/developers.front-commerce.com: source/docs/advanced/theme/sitemap.md

---
id: sitemap

> title: Configure the sitemap

Reviewer: The page is more than just a configuration overview. It provides details about how sitemaps are generated too (configuring a CRON task…).

```suggestion
title: Sitemap generation
```

---

> **Prequisite:** To follow this guide, you first need to know [how to create new pages](/docs/essentials/add-a-page-client-side.html) and [a GraphQL module](/docs/essentials/extend-the-graphql-schema.html) in Front-Commerce.

The sitemap is a key piece of each e-commerce website. It allows search engines to crawl and index your pages faster, driving to more visitors and potential clients.

## Generate a Sitemap

> Within Front-Commerce you can generate a sitemap by running the command `npm run sitemap` in your Skeleton. It will run a GraphQL query that will fetch all the routes registered in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within Front-Commerce you can generate a sitemap by running the [`npm run sitemap` command](/docs/reference/scripts.html#sitemap-js) from your Skeleton. It will run a GraphQL query that will fetch all the routes registered in your application.
```

The GraphQL query looks like this:

```graphql
query Sitemap {
  sitemap {
    baseUrl
    nodes {
      path
      priority
      changefreq
      lastmod
    }
  }
}
```

This query will be run for each store available in your `config/stores.js` file.

> If the request does not work, please make sure that the environment variable `FRONT_COMMERCE_SITEMAP_TOKEN` is available when running your script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the request does not work, please make sure that the environment variable [`FRONT_COMMERCE_SITEMAP_TOKEN`](/docs/reference/environment-variables.html#Sitemap) is available when running your script.
```

> The result of this query will then be transformed in xml files that are available in the `build/client/sitemaps` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of this query will then be transformed in xml files that are available in the `build/client/sitemaps` folder. A sitemap index file will be accessible via the following url: https://example.com/sitemaps/sitemap.xml. You could share this location with tools such as Google Search Console to ensure your website is indexed properly in search engines.
```

> On your production website, we suggest that you execute this request every night through a cron to ensure that the sitemap is up to date.

## Add your own routes in the sitemap

> By default Front-Commerce will return in the sitemap's nodes the nodes registered by the modules declared in your application. For instance, if in your `.front-commerce.js` you have registered `server/modules/magento2` in your `serverModules`, you should have categories, products and CMS pages available in your sitemap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default the sitemap will contain nodes that have been registered by modules declared in your Front-Commerce application. For instance, if you have registered a `server/modules/magento2` module in your [`.front-commerce.js`'s `serverModules` key](/docs/reference/front-commerce-js.html#serverModules), you should have categories, products and CMS pages available in your sitemap.
```

However, if you need to setup your own routes, you will need to register your own nodes.

### Add a static page

If the pages you are adding to your sitemap are static and exist regardless of the state of your shop, you can add them by creating `config/hardcodedSitemap.js` in your module.

```js
module.exports = [
  {
    path: "/",
    priority: 1,
    changefreq: "daily",
    lastmod: new Date("2017-06-01").toISOString()
  }
];
```

### Add dynamic pages

> However, if it relies on dynamic information (like an id or a slug in your URL), you will need to follow these two steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, your pages will be dynamic and rely on editable entities with an identifier like an id or a slug in their URL. Front-Commerce's sitemap mechanism allows you to include such pages in the sitemap by following these two steps:
```

- declare a GraphQL type as `Sitemapable`

> - register the pages by calling `loaders.Sitemap.registerNodesFetcher` in a module's `contextEnhancer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- register the pages by calling `loaders.Sitemap.registerNodesFetcher` from a [GraphQL module's `contextEnhancer`](/docs/reference/graphql-module-definition.html#contextEnhancer-optional).
```

> Let's say that we have a FAQ and that each question have a route `/faq/:slug`. In order to do this, we will consider that we already created a GraphQL modules that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say that we have a FAQ with a single page (`/faq/:slug`) for each question. In order to add these pages to the sitemap, we will consider that we already created a GraphQL modules that:
```

- declares the following types

  ```graphql
  # src/server/modules/faq/schema.gql
  type FaqEntry {
    slug: String
    question: String
    answer: String
  }

  extend type Query {
    allFaq: [FaqEntry]
    faq(slug: String!): FaqEntry
  }
  ```

- declares a loader that allows to fetch all the FAQ entries and returns an array of object containing the slug, the question and the answer for each FAQ entry.
  ```js
  // src/server/modules/faq/loaders.js
  const FaqLoader = () => {
    return {
      allFaq: () => {
        return fetch("https://my-faq-service.example.org/all").then(
          response => response.data
        );
      }
    };
  };
  ```

> 

Reviewer: I feel like a transition is missing. While not very inspired, here is a proposal:

```suggestion

Here is how we could then include all pages in the sitemap.
```

> #### Declare FaqEntry type as Sitemapable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Declare `FaqEntry` type as `Sitemapable`
```

> First thing first, we will need to edit our FaqEntry type to register it as Sitemapable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First thing first, we will need to edit our `FaqEntry` type so it implements the `Sitemapable` GraphQL interface (from Front-Commerce's core):
```

```diff
// src/server/modules/faq/resolvers.js
export default {
  // ...
+  FaqEntry: {
+    path: ({ slug }) => `/faq/${slug}`,
+    priority: () => 0.5,
+    lastmod: () => new Date().toISOString(),
+    changefreq: () => "daily",
+    seoImages: () => []
+  }
};
```

#### Add the question pages to the sitemap

If we want these pages to appear in the sitemap, we will need to fetch all the questions and register them in the sitemap. Thus, in the `index.js` file where you have declared your FAQ GraphQL module (ex: `src/server/modules/faq/index.js`), you will need to register your nodes like this:

```diff
// src/server/modules/faq/index.js
export default {
  // ...
+  dependencies: ["Front-Commerce/Core"]
-  contextEnhancer: () => {
+  contextEnhancer: ({ loaders }) => {
    const Faq = FaqLoader()

+    loaders.Sitemap.registerNodesFetcher("Faq", () =>
+      Faq.loadAll().then(entries => {
+        return entries.map(entry => ({
+          ...entry,
+          __typename: "FaqEntry"
+        }));
+      })
+    );

    return {
        Faq: Faq
    }
  }
  // ...
};
```

> The `Sitemap` loader is a loader that is available in the `Front-Commerce/Core` GraphQL module. Don't forget to add it. It will help you detect errors in case something is not working properly.

Reviewer: I don't understand the meaning/goal of the "Don't forget to add it. It will help you detect errors in case something is not working properly." sentences.

Was is aimed at explaining why the module was added to dependencies?

Author: In practice it's optional to set the dependency here. It will work as long as the core module is in the correct order thanks to toposort. Luckily it's mostly the case even without declaring the dependencies here. But it can lead to errors if someday it's no longer available. At least if we add the dependency, an error message will be explicitly displayed upon build and explain what's happening to the user.
